KEP-6915: mechanism to prevent admission immediately after creation (#7295)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: keps/6915-scheduling-gated-by-annotation/README.md

   - Verify appropriate error message is returned

##### Forbid using a SchedulingGatedBy that is not domain-like

1. Create Job with non domain-like annotation value
   - Try to create a `batch/v1 Job` manifest with the annotation `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by="not a domain"`
2. Verify validation prevents creation
   - Confirm the object creation is rejected by validation
   - Verify appropriate error message is returned

### Graduation Criteria

<!--

Clearly define what it means for the feature to be implemented and
considered stable.

If the feature you are introducing has high complexity, consider adding graduation
milestones with these graduation criteria:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Feature gate][feature gate] lifecycle
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

[feature gate]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/
-->

> - Re-evaluate the activation-based approach (label-based design described in Alternatives)

Reviewer: for beta please also add "SchedulingGatedBy enabled by default"

  - [Admission policy-based activation or queue-level configuration](#admission-policy-based-activation-or-queue-level-configuration)
  - [Direct Workload Interaction](#direct-workload-interaction)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

> Introduce annotation `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by` on supported Job-like objects to defer Workload scheduling. The annotation value must specify a controller name in domain-like format (e.g., `example.com/mygate`), similar to the `spec.managedBy` field in Jobs. When present, Kueue does not create a Workload object for the Job, consistent with the existing `JobWithSkip` interface behavior. Removing the annotation enables Kueue to create the Workload and proceed with normal admission and scheduling flow. For the alpha release, the annotation can only be set at Job creation time and cannot be added later; it can only be removed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Introduce annotation `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by` on supported Job-like objects to defer Workload scheduling. The annotation value must specify a controller name in a domain-prefixed path (e.g., `example.com/mygate`), similar to the `spec.managedBy` field in Jobs, which requires that all characters before the first "/" must be a valid subdomain as defined by RFC 1123 and all characters trailing the first "/" must follow RFC 3986.
When present, Kueue does not create a Workload object for the Job, consistent with the existing `JobWithSkip` interface behavior. Removing the annotation enables Kueue to create the Workload and proceed with normal admission and scheduling flow. For the alpha release, the annotation can only be set at Job creation time and cannot be added later; it can only be removed.
```

Let me describe the valid name format in more detail.

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

Provide explicit user control over activation by interacting directly with the Job objects.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Respect annotation at Job creation time
- Prevent adding annotation after Job creation (validation for alpha)
- Enforce domain-like format for annotation value (e.g., `example.com/mygate`)
- Ensure consistent behavior without breaking queue semantics

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- New CRDs or scheduler policy changes

> - Supporting multiple SchedulingGatedBy annotations for 1 Job

Reviewer 2: > - Supporting multiple SchedulingGatedBy annotations for 1 Job

If we decide on this limitation for `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by` annotation, we can not change this limitation in the future. Don't we really need to support multiple gates like 

```yaml
metadata:
  annotations:
    kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by:
      [
        {"name": "example.com/alpha"},
        {"name": "example.com/beta"}
      ]
```

Reviewer: sgtm, added to follow up comments to make that clear

   - Verify appropriate error message is returned

### Graduation Criteria

<!--

Clearly define what it means for the feature to be implemented and
considered stable.

If the feature you are introducing has high complexity, consider adding graduation
milestones with these graduation criteria:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Feature gate][feature gate] lifecycle
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

[feature gate]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/
-->

#### Alpha

- support the `SchedulingGatedBy` feature gate, disabled by default
- implement gating of scheduling by deferring Workload creation

#### Beta

- `SchedulingGatedBy` enabled by default
- Re-evaluate deferring workload scheduling instead of creation
- Re-evaluate the activation-based approach (label-based design described in Alternatives)
- Re-evaluate adding the annotation later in the lifetime of a Job

> - Re-evaluate support for JSON-style annotation

Author: That makes sense. I added a small discussion regarding the JSON arrays in the alternative section.

  - [Admission policy-based activation or queue-level configuration](#admission-policy-based-activation-or-queue-level-configuration)
  - [Direct Workload Interaction](#direct-workload-interaction)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

> Introduce annotation `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by` on supported Job-like objects to defer Workload scheduling. The annotation value must specify a controller name in a domain-prefixed path (e.g., `example.com/mygate`), similar to the `spec.managedBy` field in Jobs, which requires that all characters before the first "/" must be a valid subdomain as defined by RFC 1123 and all characters trailing the first "/" must follow RFC 3986. Multiple controllers can be listed by separating them with commas, for example: `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by: example.com/alpha,example.com/beta`.

Reviewer: Actually, if we fix the bug you open @kannon92 https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/9482 by skipping "considering by Kueue" while the Pod's schedulingGate is present, then this is actually the same behavior we are doing here. So, I think the name "scheduling-gates" fits well. 

If you think the Pod's spec.schedulingGates should be ignored by Kueue, then the issue isn't really a bug (I think).

> Introduce annotation `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by` on supported Job-like objects to defer Workload scheduling. The annotation value must specify a controller name in a domain-prefixed path (e.g., `example.com/mygate`), similar to the `spec.managedBy` field in Jobs, which requires that all characters before the first "/" must be a valid subdomain as defined by RFC 1123 and all characters trailing the first "/" must follow RFC 3986. Multiple controllers can be listed by separating them with commas, for example: `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by: example.com/alpha,example.com/beta`.

Reviewer 2: > Ok I synced with Marcin who suggests admission-getes, I also hear from Kevin scheduling gates would be confusing. So I'm good with "admission-getes". Are you ok with that name @tenzen-y? if so then we can update the doc accordingly

Why not `queuing-gated-by`? IIUC, the primary motivation for this feature is to prevent it from automatically queuing, right? This is a sibling feature as `.spec.active` in Workload.

I still think that they should use PodSpec level schedulingGates if they want to control the behavior after enqueued.

> Introduce annotation `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by` on supported Job-like objects to defer Workload scheduling. The annotation value must specify a controller name in a domain-prefixed path (e.g., `example.com/mygate`), similar to the `spec.managedBy` field in Jobs, which requires that all characters before the first "/" must be a valid subdomain as defined by RFC 1123 and all characters trailing the first "/" must follow RFC 3986. Multiple controllers can be listed by separating them with commas, for example: `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by: example.com/alpha,example.com/beta`.

Reviewer: I have no argument against queueing-gated-by. +1 for that from me. it is the most "precise" option pointing out at which phase is gated.

> Introduce annotation `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by` on supported Job-like objects to defer Workload scheduling. The annotation value must specify a controller name in a domain-prefixed path (e.g., `example.com/mygate`), similar to the `spec.managedBy` field in Jobs, which requires that all characters before the first "/" must be a valid subdomain as defined by RFC 1123 and all characters trailing the first "/" must follow RFC 3986. Multiple controllers can be listed by separating them with commas, for example: `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by: example.com/alpha,example.com/beta`.

Reviewer 2: @mwielgus This feature aims to block the first `Enqueue` phase. So, I think that `queueing-gated-by` sounds more proper. Please let us know if you still think `admission-gate` is more proper in this case.

Enqueue -> Quota Check -> TAS -> Admission Checks -> Admitted

> Introduce annotation `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by` on supported Job-like objects to defer Workload scheduling. The annotation value must specify a controller name in a domain-prefixed path (e.g., `example.com/mygate`), similar to the `spec.managedBy` field in Jobs, which requires that all characters before the first "/" must be a valid subdomain as defined by RFC 1123 and all characters trailing the first "/" must follow RFC 3986. Multiple controllers can be listed by separating them with commas, for example: `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by: example.com/alpha,example.com/beta`.

Reviewer: One alternative I could also see would be `kueue.x-k8s.io/orchestration-gated-by` to say "we gate any orchestration by Kueue", and Kueue is the Workload Orchestrator (rather than Workload Scheduler). However, I prefer  `kueue.x-k8s.io/queueing-gated-by` as more direct

> Introduce annotation `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by` on supported Job-like objects to defer Workload scheduling. The annotation value must specify a controller name in a domain-prefixed path (e.g., `example.com/mygate`), similar to the `spec.managedBy` field in Jobs, which requires that all characters before the first "/" must be a valid subdomain as defined by RFC 1123 and all characters trailing the first "/" must follow RFC 3986. Multiple controllers can be listed by separating them with commas, for example: `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by: example.com/alpha,example.com/beta`.

Author: I'm happy with `kueuing-gated-by`, what do you think @mwielgus ?

> Introduce annotation `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by` on supported Job-like objects to defer Workload scheduling. The annotation value must specify a controller name in a domain-prefixed path (e.g., `example.com/mygate`), similar to the `spec.managedBy` field in Jobs, which requires that all characters before the first "/" must be a valid subdomain as defined by RFC 1123 and all characters trailing the first "/" must follow RFC 3986. Multiple controllers can be listed by separating them with commas, for example: `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by: example.com/alpha,example.com/beta`.

Reviewer 2: As I described in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/7295#discussion_r2868612783, `admission-gated-by` sounds good to me.

- **Validation rules (alpha):**
  - Adding the annotation after Job creation is prevented by validation
  - After creation, the annotation can only be completely removed, or modified to remove one or more controller names
  - For each controller name, the characters before the first "/" must be a valid subdomain as defined by RFC 1123 and all characters trailing the first "/" must follow RFC 3986.
- **When annotation is present:** Kueue does not create a Workload object for the Job, consistent with the existing `JobWithSkip` interface behavior when `Skip(ctx)` returns true
- **When annotation is removed:** Jobs follow the standard Kueue workflow (Workload created immediately)
- Jobs without the annotation follow the standard Kueue workflow (Workload created immediately)

### User Stories

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

A user is preparing a Job but does not want Kueue to admit it yet. They create the Job

> with the annotation `kueue.x-k8s.io/scheduling-gated-by: "example.com/mygate"`.

Reviewer: Could you expand maybe a bit more about the example use-case why a user would prefer holding a Job? Some ideas I see: 
1. the Job execution depends on another Job
2. some external controller needs to prepare infra for the Job first

In case of (1.) we may also consider some core feature like "depends-on" inside Kueue. Actually, we have this case recently when some users need to prevent scheduling of "worker" Jobs in JobSet before the coordinator is admitted. For this use case we may need to introduce the "depends-on" annotation into Kueue. Once we have it, I'm wondering if it could also support your use-case here.

Reviewer: Thank you 👍 Yes, the "A controller wants to modify the job before it starts executing" sounds like something that makes the "gated-by" still relevant.

Author: Actually, I should mention that I'm happy with any alternative mechanism in Kueue that would allow me to apply patches to my AI tuning Jobs "safely" by:

- ensuring the Jobs cannot start before my controller has completed its setup, and
- avoiding any need for my controller to interact with resources other than the Job it owns

The first "constraint" is to avoid patching a Job after it has started executing which could result in the Job being pre-empted and restarted with a potentially "now-incompatible" checkpoint due to the GPU count changing.

The second "constraint" is mainly to avoid granting RBAC permissions for Kueue‑internal CRs like Workload. This helps reduce the risk of my controller mistakenly modifying a Workload in a way that negatively impacts Kueue’s behaviour or performance.

that support native suspension (e.g., `Job`, `PyTorchJob`, etc), Kueue enforces
this by setting `spec.suspend=true`. By taking ownership of the suspension
fields in the Job APIs it manages, Kueue ensures that all such Jobs remain
suspended until they pass its standard admission checks. Once Kueue observes
the creation of a managed Job, it creates the corresponding Workload object and
begins considering the Job for admission.

This behavior, however, stops users from creating a Job and deferring when
Kueue should start considering it for admission. Even if a user initially
sets `spec.suspend=true`, Kueue will still consider it for admission and 
override it after admitting the Job. As a result, there is currently no clean 
mechanism for users to express the following intent:

> Create this Job now, but do not admit it until I explicitly release it.

The proposed `AdmissionGatedBy` annotation fills this gap.

`AdmissionGatedBy` enables users to declare that the Job's admission should be
gated (i.e., ignored by Kueue for admission) while there is at least 1 gate 
enabled. By removing the gate(s) later, users gain explicit control over when

> Kueue should begin its standard admission workflow.

Reviewer: This is ok-ish, but I think it's too verbose. Maybe a shorter motivation like:

Currently, once Kueue observes the creation of a managed Job, it creates the corresponding Workload and immediately starts considering it for admission.

This is problematic for workflows where an external controller needs to adjust the Job (for example, patch resource requests) before it should be eligible for admission.

     annotation to the existing Job
3. Verify validation prevents modification
   - Confirm the annotation modification is rejected by validation
   - Verify appropriate error message is returned

##### Allow removing 1 AdmissionGatedBy controller name post creation

1. Create Job without annotation
   - Create a `batch/v1 Job` manifest with annotation `kueue.x-k8s.io/admission-gated-by=example.com/mygate,example.com/mygate2`
2. Attempt to add annotation after creation
   - Try to set `kueue.x-k8s.io/admission-gated-by=example.com/mygate2` annotation to the existing Job
3. Verify validation permits modification
   - Confirm the annotation modification is applied
   - Verify appropriate error message is returned
4. Verify no Workload is created
   - Confirm that no corresponding `Workload` resource exists
   - Job remains in gated state

##### Forbid using an AdmissionGatedBy that is not domain-like

1. Create Job with non domain-like annotation value
   - Try to create a `batch/v1 Job` manifest with the annotation `kueue.x-k8s.io/admission-gated-by="not a domain"`
2. Verify validation prevents creation
   - Confirm the object creation is rejected by validation

>    - Verify appropriate error message is returned

Reviewer: I think this testing plan is too detailed, and too focused on workload creation or not. Let's abstract this out. The scenarios we want to test:
1. Verify the Job/Workload is not scheduled while the annotation is present
2. Verify the Job/Workload gets scheduled as soon as the annotation is released

Author: Should I use the word "admitted" instead of scheduled just for consistency?

### Graduation Criteria

<!--

Clearly define what it means for the feature to be implemented and
considered stable.

If the feature you are introducing has high complexity, consider adding graduation
milestones with these graduation criteria:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Feature gate][feature gate] lifecycle
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

[feature gate]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/
-->

#### Alpha

- support the `AdmissionGatedBy` feature gate, disabled by default

> - implement gating of admission by deferring Workload creation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- support the `AdmissionGatedBy` feature gate, disabled by default
```
